# Fair geolocation extraction from humanitarian documents using Large Language Models

This repository contains the implementation of the two-step geolocation extraction framework presented in the paper "Fair geolocation extraction from humanitarian documents using Large Language Models" as presented at the Workshop on Multimodal Content Analysis for Social Good (MM4SG) 2026 co-located with WebConf (WWW) 2026. 

If you use this work, please cite:
@article{cafferata2026large,
  title={Large Language Models for Geolocation Extraction in Humanitarian Crisis Response},
  author={Cafferata, Gianmarco and Demarco, Tiziano and Kalimeri, Kyriaki and Mejova, Yelena and Beir{\'o}, Mariano G},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08872},
  year={2026}
}

The system combines few-shot Large Language Model (LLM) Named Entity Recognition (NER) with an agent-based geocoding module to extract and resolve literal toponyms from humanitarian texts.

## Installation

All requirements are within the pypropject.toml, and the exact versions used at the poetry.lock.

To install:
```
pip install poetry
poetry install
```

## Structure

The structure of the directories is as follows:

* `data`: Contains all the data used and generated by the scripts
* `geocoding_services`: The docker services needed
* `plots`: The relevant plots generated
* `src`: Contains abstractions, DTOs and functional classes for the NER tagging, geocoding, interactions with LLMs and metrics.

## Usage

All notebooks and .py used for experiments are in the root folder. To run the geocoding and some of the notebooks it is required to run the pelias service.

### Pelias service

To the service run docker is needed, go to `/geocoding_services` and run:

```
docker-compose up
```

Since pelias does not support some geonames feature codes some of the pelias scripts had to be modified.

### Scripts and notebooks description

* `Metrics.ipynb`: Runs the final metrics and results over the generated dataset
* `Spacy TRF Transfer Learning.py`: Runs the transfer learning over the Spacy TRF model
* `XML Roberta NER Transfer Learning.py`: Runs the transfer learning over the XML Roberta model.

Some of the scripts are still missing and will be added soon.

## Citation
WIP
